Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com
from hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
a weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number four 88. In this
episode, Scott talks with emoji
Miller about redesigning computer science
education. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes. And today
I'm talking with emoji Miller.
She is the lead researcher
on the hip hop project
at UC Berkeley. She's got
a degree in computer science,
a master's in electrical engineering,
and is currently deep, deep
into working on a doctorate
on a computer science education.
You have you, are you
a PhD yet? No, I
am not. In a couple
of weeks will be dr.
Miller. That is very exciting.
How are you going to
insist everyone? Call your doctor?
I think that if you
spend that much time in
school, though, it's your right
now, Want me to write
some books and make money
beyond that? I just wanted
to have the knowledge for
my own desires. And what
is your thesis on? What
have you, what is the
knowledge you've collected? So what
I've been working on is
the social curricular activities that
impact women and underrepresented minorities
at a research one university
like Berkeley. We wanted to
figure out if we could
do things to help boost
the representation of certain groups
at the collegiate level, so
that we're running experiments. If
we design a new course
from scratch, focusing on computational
thinking, would that attract more
women? Will that attract more
ethnic minorities? So it's a
lot of work in introductory
computer science. And when I
first started this whole line
of inquiry, I did not
know that this becomes something
very, very interesting. I thought,
Oh, it's intro computer science.
I just want to know
what's going on in this
kind of space. I've now
come to realize that creating
the entryway for people is
of paramount importance because without
a good entryway, they'll never
be able to ramp up
in our field. So does
is the postulate that existing
intro to computer science courses
are framed in such a
way that they aren't attractive
to all kinds of people?
Absolutely. The case, yes. They're
not attractive to most kinds
of people. This is not
necessarily just about women or
ethnic minorities. This is about
men too, the way we've
done computer science right now,
it only works for a
small subset of the population.
Even if you look at
just men, white and Asian
males, we still tend to
skew towards a certain kind
of personality. We don't have
a diversity of personalities even
within those groups and is
because of the way that
we teach things. We teach
things in a very abstract
December bloodied way, and we
don't teach things to solve
problems that real people have.
We just teach you like
almost discrete math, completely devoid
of fleshing, the whole thing
out, and actually solving a
tangible problem for an organization.
That's interesting. The there's always
that personality type or that,
that stereotype of the, of
the nerd that's focused on
the tiny technical details. We
always joke about, you know,
dungeon, Dungeons and dragons, right?
But that is the personality
type that is, you know,
typically at a very good
programmer because they're so detail
oriented. They remember all the
tiny little business rules and
how they interact and that
allows them to see how
a system works. It is
in fact, the case that,
yes, that kind of personality
does well programming, computer science,
but as a fallacy, that's
not the only personality that
does well with programming. Everybody
has a level of slight
obsession if you want to
call it that. Yeah. It
depends on what they're obsessed
about, but you're absolutely right.
Exactly. It depends on if
you're interest for some people
they're interested in solving a
particular problem for a specific
reason. And given the problem,
they'll figure out everything. They
need to know some other
people, actually, not that interested
in solving a particular problem,
they're more interested in intellectual
brain teases. They're interested in
something because it is hard
and they want to figure
out the want to make
it simple. It doesn't have
to matter if it's solving
anything for anybody. So those
kinds of personalities is what
we have right now. People
who are like I'm obsessive
puzzle solver. Yes. I think
that's absolutely true that that's,
that's who I have been
working with for the last
20 years. And that person
has a specific role to
play, but as technology's becoming
more and more ubiquitous, and
the end products of technology
are beginning to interact more
and more with people who
are not technologically savvy. It
is imperative that you have
the other kinds of people
in the field, because what
ends up happening is you
build a product and it
has very low adoption because
you've solved the problem that
nobody even recognized as a
problem. And you haven't solved
a problem that people are
interested in. So it becomes,
you know, you write all
this apps and they just
clog the app store and
they go nowhere. So Is
that that's comes at it
from the kind of a
top down perspective where apps
are not designed for all
different kinds of people. So
they're not going to, you
know, achieve ubiquity and achieve
success. But from the bottom
up thinking about from like
the metal up, is there
something that we do in
either education or programming, language
design or UI design to
make computers more attractive to
everyone, specifically the making of
stuff and the writing of
stuff, as opposed to the,
the, the consumption? Yeah, Absolutely.
It's the case. The first
number one challenge is the
way you teach a programming
language. So for example, if
the very first taste you
have is fighting syntax for
a lot of people, frightened
syntax does not give them
a sense of achievement. They
want to solve a problem.
Maybe they want to build
their own version of Pac-Man
and they want instant gratification.
They were willing to spend
an hour or two hours
fiddling about with this thing.
And then this is something
that works. If that two
hours is literally spent building
a dev environment, which is
the case, oftentimes depending on
what kind of programming language
you're starting off with, you're
just like, I spent two
hours building this dev environment
and I have nothing to
show for it. Right? If
you start them off on
something, very, very simple, but
teaches the fundamentals of competitional
thinking something like scratch, which
is not too incomplete, even
though a lot of people
give it like, Oh, it's
for kids, but it's one
of those things that lets
you have preciate computation just
for computation sake and still
gives you that visual feedback
very, very quickly. So you
do something 30 minutes, there's
something up there and you
can actually like send that
little app to a friend
and that friend can play
something on that app. You
feel a sense of accomplishment.
All of a sudden you're
like, Oh my God, somebody
is using something that I
wrote, even though it might
not be earth shattering. Once
you can click that, Oh
my God, it's easier to
move that person to Python
or to Java and becoming
much more complex problem solvers.
Yeah. Yesterday at, at Oz
con at the open source
conference, I took my seven
year old and my nine
year old. And we went
to a unity demonstration and
class that was done by
Stacy Mulcahy. And she showed
the boys how to make
a flappy bird and the
part, and I'm not familiar
with unity. I, you know,
I knew that it exists
and what it does, but
what blew me away was
that they, they put their
Sprite on the screen and
then they gave it a
rigid body, two dimensional physics
attribute, and they hit play
and it dropped like a
stone. And in my mind,
the distance that was going
to be required from, you
know, putting a Sprite on
the screen and getting it
to behave like it had
gravity was going to be
quite a bit farther than
that. We, we built up
almost full game in about
two hours. Yeah. I mean,
this is it's possible. And
I think we, that learned
the old school way, feel
like, Oh no, no, no.
It's going to take that's
three weeks worth of work
to get to that point.
No, I, my, my nine
year old I went to
his class. He goes to
a school that was very
project focused and they will
have coding. This kids have
code in, in their class.
And they've been working on
a project for three months
and there's a kind of
demo day. You go in
there and the shell show
you what the built and
I am just in awe.
This is at the point
they're eight years old, floppy
birds and angry birds must
be the thing. They build
their own version of flappy
birds. And the simulation was
so realistic. And I was
like, how did you guys
get that? And they looked
at me like I was
broken and the set of
physics engine, duh, I was
just like, wow. So physics
engine who knew there was
just like, yeah, you'd get
your physics engine into it
so that your simulations are
realistic. These are kids who
now have a deep sense
of what it is to
create something. These are nine
year old, eight year olds
talking about a physics engine
for realistic simulation. So they're
focusing their energy on the
computation. They're not fighting syntax
and they're actually building something
that you will play and
you will spend hours playing.
Right. And it seems like
we, the, you know, the
leaders of the designers, the
old people are still maybe
in the old world, not
thinking about these new things.
Cause right now we have
ubiquitous network. Yup. We have
a very nice clean layer
of abstraction with HTTP. We
can get resources very easily.
You know, we don't worry
about zip file formats anymore.
You know, the, the, the
thing I remember the like
during, when I was coming
up, we still hadn't decided
how to squish data, how
to compress data. You know,
so many problems have been,
have been solved. And we're
exactly, even that's a great
way to put it. Not
just solved, eliminated. They are
non-issues thereby, but computer science
one-on-one is the same class
it's been for the last
40 years. Exactly. You want
to teach people about data
structures, which is fabulous. Everybody
needs to know data structures,
but the way we teach,
it's almost like we're teaching.
We forget that we are
human beings. The best teacher
is a sales person. I
have this fundamental idea that
you cannot teach anybody. Anything.
What you can do is
guided facilitation. They have to
decide, they want to learn
it. Once you turn on
the light, they will go
and get the knowledge that
they need for themselves. And
you will be the human
that can help them figure
out the bottlenecks faster because
the world is so different.
Now, everything you literally need
to know is available to
you somewhere online. So the
idea that I, the teacher
I'm the expert is no
longer the case. I a
certain skill that I can
support you in your learning,
but I am no means
the expert. You might end
up being the expert for
that area. I just need
to unravel the little layers
that's holding you back and
get you on your way.
Wow. That just really blew
my mind because I was
an adjunct professor for awhile.
And I would, I would
try to focus on knowing
as much as I could
about the topic so that
I could go and, you
know, bring the knowledge. But
you're absolutely right. I mean,
most of those kids were
smarter than me already. I
need to be a facilitator
as much as a teacher.
And it's not even a
good business case. Imagine being
a CEO and you want
to solve all the problems
by yourself. There's no point
you're going to get a
CEO or CFO or CTO.
And you have employees and
the solve problems in aggregation
as a team, you are
adjust the coach. That is
that's really, that's really great
way to put it. So
then a well structured computer
science, one Oh one class
would be as much exploratory
as it is absorbing a
knowledge about the past. Absolutely.
A well structured class says
day one. This is where
we're going to get to
in X amount of hours.
This is the end goal.
How we get to the
end goal. We may, we
have a, we have a
plan, but we might deviate
from the plan, but know
that this is the end
goal. And we're going to
co-create our path there together.
But how much history should
there be though? One of
the things that I have
appreciated with the T being
able to look back and
say I was there and
this was happening when I
was coming up and you
know, things like AOL and
dial up, you know, you
get a little bit of
a, like, get off my
lawn kind of an attitude.
But at the same time
you get the perspective of
history. Yes. And I want
young people to appreciate that.
I don't necessarily want them
to suffer. Like they don't
need to use assembly. No,
no, but they should know
that the metal exists and
that the machine code exists
at some point that there
should be a history of
computers. Maybe it just shouldn't
be in CS one Oh
one. No, it should be
there. I literally, I read
the statement somewhere that it
is injecting education into culture
and not the other way
around. And I'm an avid
fan of history. You need
to know the foundations. You
need to understand what it
is that you're standing on.
Otherwise, what you build is
not going to be successful.
Cause right now you can
bring somebody into an environment,
teach them some frameworks and
some Java script. And in
12 weeks that person will
say, I'm a junior developer.
And have they built something?
Yes they have. Are they
really a software engineer? That's
pretty much stretching the word
as far as it can
go because you scratch the
surface just a little bit
and ask this person a
simple question around lists, comprehension
in Python, and the whole
thing falls apart. All you
ask them a question of
why should I use the
link list, a doubly linked
list versus a single eloquent
list. And then you're done.
That's it. There's just like
a glare. There's no depth
there. So that's dangerous. This
episode of Hansel minutes is
brought to you by audible.
This is especially meaningful to
me as I have been
an audible fan. Since the
very beginning, I've listened to
probably a hundred audio books
on a commute between Portland
and Seattle. My favorite feature
is whisper sync for voice.
And that means that I
can start reading on my
Kindle. Then listen to the
audio audible book and pick
up exactly where I left
off. My place is always
synced between the two books.
They've set up a special
deal for you at audible.com/hansel
minutes. And I think that
you should take that deal
and you should get a
book like ready player one
or the Martian. There's some
amazing books by David Sedaris,
Neil Stevenson, all of our
favorite authors are available@audible.com. And
if you already own the
Kindle book, you get discounts.
Even then, it's just a
fantastic service. And now that
it is a part of
the Amazon family, it's even
better. Again, that's audible.com/hansel minutes.
You're already listening to this
podcast. Why don't you try
listening to audio books? Wouldn't
they argue that that you're
being a little exclusionary and
that those things aren't needed
anymore, but that, you know,
that being a Drupal developer
is still a developer. As
an example, There's a developer,
but it's not the same
kinds of things. This is
the way the best way
I can explain it is
this. I like to eat.
I'm a foodie. And I
live in this glorious place
called Berkeley where we can
get like Michelin level cuisine.
So if the goal is
to situate my hunger, I
can go to shape her
niece, which is one of
the top 50 restaurants in
the world and have this
fabulous culinary experience. It was
still set yet. My hunger.
On the other hand, I
could just go to my
local taco truck and eat
something. And my hunger is
situated. Those are two separate
experiences. They solve the same
problem, but the solvent and
very, very interesting ways. If
you are a Drupal developer
and that is all, you
know, you're going to get
very far, but you're not
going to get as far
as you could possibly go.
You start off on your
way and you're right there.
But if what you want
is to actually architect something
from scratch or invent something
amazing, or have a very
high level of sophistication about
your craft, you're gonna need
to know about the bones
of it. Software engineering, a
high level, vocational craft. It
is a craft, but the
craft rest on the, on
the layer of computer science,
but it is a craft.
So you need both of
them. You need some parts
of the computer science and
they need to transition from
a beginner to a master
developer. You know that those,
this, this, I love that
you said craft this concept
of like craftsman ship and,
and the, the idea of
the apprentice it's been lost.
There's so many people, like
you said, they go to
a code camp and they
come out of junior developer
or they, you know, they
w it's like, how do
we balance the, the quality
and the craft and trying
to create high quality thinkers
who can go and be
software engineers in the real
world. And at the same
time, we want to make
it, you know, easy and
make the onboarding experience for
young people. Easy. Like you
don't want to say, all
right, get started. It's easy.
Look, you can make fluffy
burden an hour. Now work
for 15 years and maybe
you'll get senior engineer. You
know, there's a balance. There's
a balance. There's a there's.
So maybe not 15 years,
but maybe a year. Like
there are no shortcuts to
greatness. There's just not a,
and the hours you need
to practice, you truly need
to practice. We say over
here that for you to
get to a certain level
of proficiency in anything, especially
something technical, you need 15
hours a week for 50
weeks Is that 10,000 hours
is that the, the Gladwell
number, It's not necessarily 10,000
hours. There aren't like 400
and something hours for it
to really, really get good
at something. This technical true.
You need that time. Now,
how you get to that
time is up to you.
It could take you 15
years to get to that
level of time working on
a certain data structure. Or
you could take you six
months if that's all you
did. But how you get
to the time is up
to you. Get into that
time is completely in escapable.
You got to get to
practice and be that good
at it. You cannot, if
three months is not enough
time of practice. Right? But
isn't that, that's the, that's
the funny dichotomy of all
of this is that you
want to get them excited
in an hour. Yes. But
you don't want them to
think at the end of
that hour that they're done
and they know computers. Exactly.
You don't want somebody to
go to a hackathon and
say, now hire me as
a junior developer, right? You
want to let them know
this is an onboarding on
a journey. And what we
will achieve in an hour
is basically we've opened the
door, but the journey has
not started. You are Dorothy
on the yellow brick road.
We're not at all as
yet. So how are you
structuring these classes? I I've
taught computer science one Oh
one. I know how it
was done in the late
nineties. How should it be
done tomorrow? Tomorrow? The way
that I would do it,
if I was doing computer
science, one Oh one tomorrow
is basically tell you, this
is what we're trying to
get at at the end
of whatever it is, three
months, four months, and then
treat my students as adults.
I will literally still start
them off in a drag
and drop graphical environment like
scratch or unity or anything
like that, so that they
can understand you can easily
build something and get those
juices flowing. Then I will
then dial it back down
and say, now that we've
seen how it can build
flappy birds, now we're going
to go and learn the
fundamentals and then situated in
terms of society. And that
last bit of situating it
in terms of society is
what I often don't see
happening at all. You're just
solving problems in a December
disengaged way. So that's an
issue that's really interesting because
I've, I've done the let's
make a game and now
let's look at how a
circle gets drawn. Yeah. But
how A circuit gets drawn
is super interesting to me,
but I've tried to teach
my, my wife who has
more degrees than I, and
speaks more languages than I,
but has a focused disinterest
in computer science and how,
you know, how interesting it
is to draw a circle
and the math behind it.
She doesn't care. It's even
more of a turn off.
Like if she could get
even more disinterested in computers,
it would be, let's do
a class on how to
draw a circle. But is
that, is it that kind
of thinking that is getting
us certain kinds of people
in software? It is absolutely
that. So instead of let's
get, we're going to draw
a circle after we drove
the circle that was actually
talking about gaming. Do we
like what we're seeing in
gaming right now? What is
the video game that you've
played that you really absolutely
love? How did that video
game make you feel? And
you talk about the psychology
of building games and gimmicks
vacation, and how you can
continue on a quest and
a video game forever and
never, and you're never give
up. And you bring that
in and said, this is
how education is supposed to
be and create an environment
where it's easy for you
to feel when you're trying
to play a video game
or you're trying to get
to the next level. Nobody
believes that they're going to
reach the summit of the
levels of the video gaming,
their first try. That's why
it's addictive. You just want
to keep on trying so
they can get as far
as you can. And you
talk about all the mechanics
of that. People are going
to be engaged. And then
you're going to go all
the way back and say,
now for us to build
all this, we need to
understand how to draw circles
and polygons and rectangles and
all this kind of other
stuff. Then they're like, Oh,
okay, I see why we
are doing this. Now That
really works. That makes a
lot of sense. I mean,
this is where we want
to go. And this circle
drawing bit stands in our
way. Let's just get that
out of the way. We'll
do that. But they need
to see what, what the
goal is. Because if you
go and try to teach
someone that the circle is
the goal, no, you're going
to get a very specific
kind of personality. Exactly. And
most of people are going
to be like, I don't
care about the math behind
this, no matter how interesting
that math is, they're like,
I don't care. How is
this solving my problem? It's
not solving their problem. I
don't care. I don't want
to do this again. This
is so funny because I
wrote an application in 1993
or 94 for the Palm
pilot, Palm little black and
white pump. Okay. So the
Palm pilot did not have
a math library. Okay. It
had no sign. It had
no co-sign it also didn't
have floating point. Oh yeah.
So I took an integer
and cut it in half
and said, all right, these
top bits are on the
left of the decimal. And
these bottom bits are on
the right of the decimal.
And I basically wrote a
holes, math library on a
non floating point to draw
a circle. And I ran
and I showed my then
girlfriend, look at what I
just did. I drew a
circle on this, you know,
pilot. And just th the
disinterest was palpable. Cause she
was like, I am, I
should be excited because just
doesn't get it. Doesn't get
all the work you did.
Like, I literally like invented
scientific potent point method that
didn't exist. I build this
whole layer of obstruction. Yeah.
Yeah. So by the time
I had done the flood,
Phil, you know, I think
we'd broken up. Yeah. It's
those things like, why, why
should I care? What literally
it's always, why should I
care? It might seem so
like mystical and narcissistic, but
if you're teaching people, that's
the first thing they want
to know. Why should I
care? Why should I? So
here's the thing. The application
I wrote was a diabetes
blood sugar management system, you
know, 20 plus years ahead
of its time that that
particular person disinterested in circle
drawing could have been potentially
a really great business manager
or project manager or UI
designer. If I had only
come at it from that
direction. Exactly. And that is
the task that we, as
the computer science educator community
has to solve. And not
just for students who are
like 10 years old or
12 years old for post-college
Really? Oh yeah. You don't
just give up on the
old people. Oh, absolutely not.
That's my sweet spot. That's
what I love working with.
Because you know, when you're
working with a 10 year
old kid, I mean, it's
satisfying. The kid is doing
this. It's learning that. And
maybe in five years or
16 years or six years,
it'll come to fruition and
adult, like this is like
major now an adult, right.
Knows nothing. And then a
year from now, that person
is a bonafide premium software
engineer. And they're adding value
to society in 12 months.
That is amazing. Not only
is it amazing from the
fact that they actually add
in value, they are getting
a livable wage. That is
kind of pretty awesome. So
you can move people from
poverty into the middle class
in less than 12 months.
And it's all legal. You're
not doing anything. It is
all legal. You should, you
should get a tee shirt
that says, ask me about
software engineering. And like, it's
all legal. And that's a
really great hashtag Selling crack.
But the crack though is
selling his addiction to problem
solving. Yeah. It's open source.
It's free. It's open source
free and you get paid
for it. How, how could
anyone not want this job?
Exactly? How could anyone not
want this job? And then
it's like, you can change
your life. You could work
from home. Every kind of
personality is needed. If you
never want to talk to
a human being, there's a
place for you. If you're
like talking to human beings
all the time, guess what?
You'll be a great product
manager. And there's something for
everybody. If you're an artist,
UI UX, if you, all
you want to do is
just tell stories all day
long. There's a place for
you in writing narratives for
video games or movies, any
kind of personality at this
point has a space in
computer science. It seems like
we've got to convince people
that who are maybe set
in their way, that lots
of different kinds of what
I call it. Diversity in
thinking is absolutely required on,
on good teams. Oh, absolutely.
Especially if you're trying to
solve some very hard problems
or like right now here
at Berkeley, we actually created
a development engineering minor that
is interdisciplinary because we've actually
sent your research. If you
create solutions to problems that
people are interested in and
the people guide the problems
they get to pick, you
actually build a more diverse
team. And you actually also
attract diversity in that group
and you solve better problems
and problems that the solutions
have high adoption rates. Because
often times you might, there's
nothing more frustrating than having
the solution to a problem.
And nobody cares and it's
not adopted and it doesn't
actually make it to market.
It's just sitting on a
shelf or it's sitting in
some archive or it's sitting
in get hub, like nothing
is coming from it. That's
like the last mile problem
actually adding value to society.
The, the, the thing that
I try to use when
I'm talking to people of
all, any age about computers
is the idea that this
represents power. Oh, here it
is. You know, if you
don't feel, if you feel
disempowered, you know, get, get
even a little bit of
technical understanding about what's going
on and you start making
your way up. The a
very, very, Absolutely, absolutely for
very quickly. And for people
who feel disempowered, especially, I
mean, women are the largest,
the most marginalized majority. They
could have power people of
color who have been disproportionately
weirded out. They could have
power. And that's where data
science actually is interesting and
statistics and data mining, because
those are the parts of
computation now that are very
much driven by what the
human is interested in finding
out. So the kinds of
experiments that get run on
data are the kinds of
experiments that the human decides
they want to run. And
because of the kinds of
questions you ask, you will
find a different set of
answers. And I think that's
where diversity really, really comes
to play and becomes even
critical, even way more critical
in getting great insight into
large data sets. Yeah. I
think that people take the
word diversity, which is simply
a word, you know, that,
you know, it means literally
what it means. And they
start applying a lot more
to it than maybe is
necessary. And they also start
thinking, well, this is about
gender. This is about color.
This is about, you know,
it is. And it isn't,
it's more than that. Right?
But it's that homogenous groups
don't succeed. No, no, they,
they, they, they, they, they
die off. Absolutely. It's just,
it's just what it is.
And this one, you don't
even have to be a
Christian to appreciate this, the
stories of the gospel and
the Bible they're telling everybody
is saying the same thing
about an event that witnessed
over a couple of years,
but they're telling it from
very different perspectives. And that
is a diverse take on
what happened. So maybe Mark
tells it from his perspective.
Luke tells it from his
perspective, the other one tells
it from his perspective and
somewhere along the line, if
they all tell him the
same story, at some point,
there should be some unity
and that's what happened, but
you don't lose any different
having the diverse perspectives. Very
true. Very true. Well, thank
you so much for chatting
with me. Thank you so
much, Scott, for inviting me.
This was fun. Hopefully by
the time people listen to
this, you will not just
be soon to be dr.
Miller, but you will be
actually dr. Meltzer. I wish
you all the best. Thank
you so much. This has
been another episode of Hanselminutes
and we'll see you again
next week.